feat(curriculum): adding content for react useState and useEffect review page (#59130)
freeCodeCamp/freeCodeCamp: curriculum/challenges/english/25-front-end-development/review-react-state-and-hooks/67c2bbd476f6e540b4c0b0d4.md

---
id: 67c2bbd476f6e540b4c0b0d4
title: React useState and useEffect Review
challengeType: 24
dashedName: review-react-state-and-hooks
---

# --description--

## Working with Events in React

- **Synthetic Event System**: This is React's way of handling events. It serves as a wrapper around the native events like the `click`, `keydown`, and `submit` events. Event handlers in React use the camel casing naming convention. (Ex. `onClick`, `onSubmit`, etc)

Here is an example of using the `onClick` attribute for a `button` element in React:

```jsx
function handleClick() {
  console.log("Button clicked!");
}

<button onClick={handleClick}>Click Me</button>;
```

> In React, event handler functions usually start with the prefix handle to indicate they are responsible for handling events, like `handleClick` or `handleSubmit`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In React, event handler functions usually start with the prefix `handle` to indicate they are responsible for handling events, like `handleClick` or `handleSubmit`.
```

> When a user action triggers an event, React passes a Synthetic Event object to your handler. This object behaves much like the native event object in vanilla JavaScript, providing properties like `type`, `target`, and `currentTarget`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user action triggers an event, React passes a Synthetic Event object to your handler. This object behaves much like the native Event object in vanilla JavaScript, providing properties like `type`, `target`, and `currentTarget`.
```

}

<button onClick={() => handleDelete(1)}>Delete Item</button>;
```

## Working with State and the `useState` Hook

- **Definition for state**: In React, state is a object that contains data for a component. When the state updates the component will re-render. React treats state as immutable, meaning you should not modify it directly.  
- **`useState()` Hook**: The `useState` hook is a function that lets you declare state variables in functional components.  Here is an basic syntax:

```js
const [stateVariable, setStateFunction] = useState(initialValue);
```

In the state variable you have the following:

- `stateVariable` holds the current state value
- `setStateFunction` (the setter function) updates the state variable
- `initialValue` sets the initial state

Here is a complete example for a `Counter` component:

```jsx
import { useState } from "react";

function Counter() {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0);

  return (
    <div>
      <h2>{count}</h2>

      <button onClick={() => setCount(count - 1)}>Decrement</button>
      <button onClick={() => setCount(count + 1)}>Increment</button>
    </div>
  );
}

export default Counter;
```

## Rendering and React Components 

> - **Definition**: In React, rendering is the process by which components appear in the user interface (UI), usually the browser. The rendering process consists of three stages: trigger, render, and commit. The trigger stage occurs when React detects that something has changed and the user interface (UI) might need to be updated. This change is often due to an update in state or props. Once the trigger happens, React enters the render stage. Here, React re-evaluates your components and figures out what to display. To do this, React uses a lightweight copy of the "real" DOM called the virtual DOM. With the virtual DOM, React can quickly check what needs to change in the component. The commit stage is where React takes the prepared changes from the virtual DOM and applies them to the real DOM. In other words, this is the stage where you see the final result on the screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Definition**: In React, rendering is the process by which components appear in the user interface (UI), usually the browser. The rendering process consists of three stages: trigger, render, and commit.

The trigger stage occurs when React detects that something has changed and the user interface (UI) might need to be updated. This change is often due to an update in state or props.

Once the trigger happens, React enters the render stage. Here, React re-evaluates your components and figures out what to display. To do this, React uses a lightweight copy of the "real" DOM called the virtual DOM. With the virtual DOM, React can quickly check what needs to change in the component.

The commit stage is where React takes the prepared changes from the virtual DOM and applies them to the real DOM. In other words, this is the stage where you see the final result on the screen.
```

```js
import { useEffect } from "react";

useEffect(() => {
 // Your side effect logic (usually a function) goes here
}, [dependencies]);
```

The effect function runs after the component renders, while the optional `dependencies` argument controls when the effect runs.

Note that `dependencies` can be an array of "reactive values" (state, props, functions, variables, and so on), an empty array, or omitted entirely. Here's how all of those options control how `useEffect` works:

- If `dependencies` is an array that includes one or more reactive values, the effect will run whenever they change.

- If `dependencies` is an empty array, `useEffect` runs only once when the component first renders.

- If you omit `dependencies`, the effect runs every time the component renders or updates.

## How to Create Custom Hooks

> - **Custom Hooks**: With a custom hook, you can extract logic away from any components that use them, like data fetching, state management, toggling, side effects like checking for the online or offline status of users, and so on. In React, all built-in hooks start with the word "use", so your custom hook should follow the same convention. Here is an example of creating a `useDebounce` hook:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Custom Hooks**: With a custom hook, you can extract logic away from any components that use them, like data fetching, state management, toggling, side effects like checking for the online or offline status of users, and so on. In React, all built-in hooks start with the word `use`, so your custom hook should follow the same convention.

Here is an example of creating a `useDebounce` hook:
```

---
id: 67c2bbd476f6e540b4c0b0d4

> title: React useState and useEffect Review

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: React State and Hooks Review
```

```js
import { useEffect } from "react";

useEffect(() => {
 // Your side effect logic (usually a function) goes here
}, [dependencies]);
```

The effect function runs after the component renders, while the optional `dependencies` argument controls when the effect runs.

Note that `dependencies` can be an array of "reactive values" (state, props, functions, variables, and so on), an empty array, or omitted entirely. Here's how all of those options control how `useEffect` works:

- If `dependencies` is an array that includes one or more reactive values, the effect will run whenever they change.

- If `dependencies` is an empty array, `useEffect` runs only once when the component first renders.

- If you omit `dependencies`, the effect runs every time the component renders or updates.

## How to Create Custom Hooks

> - **Custom Hooks**: With a custom hook, you can extract logic away from any components that use them, like data fetching, state management, toggling, side effects like checking for the online or offline status of users, and so on. In React, all built-in hooks start with the word `use`, so your custom hook should follow the same convention.

Reviewer 3: Reworded this paragraph a bit for clarity:

```suggestion
- **Custom Hooks**: A custom hook allows you to extract reusable logic from components, such as data fetching, state management, toggling, and side effects like tracking online status. In React, all built-in hooks start with the word `use`, so your custom hook should follow the same convention.
```

Here is an example of creating a `useDebounce` hook:

```jsx
function useDebounce(value, delay) {
  const [debouncedValue, setDebouncedValue] = useState(value);

  useEffect(() => {
    const handler = setTimeout(() => {
      setDebouncedValue(value);
    }, delay);

    return () => {
      clearTimeout(handler);
    };
  }, [value, delay]);

  return debouncedValue;
}

export { useDebounce };
```

# --assignment--

> Review the `useState()` and `useEffect()` hooks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Review the React state and hooks topics and concepts.
```

One more.
